---
layout: post
title: On Remand
date: 2025-12-19 17:12 +0000
categories: [Rambles]
tags: [UK, Protest, Activism, Politics]
---

I find myself repeating this a lot so I'll put it all here.

The government's use of remand for activists who pose no real threat is extrajudicial punishment.

They know that the conviction rate for activists is low, especially when tried by jury.
It is, therefore, clear that they are resorting to using remand to get the punishment they want.

## What is remand?
Simply, remand is when someone is kept in custody before trial.

## When can it be used?
The specifics are set out in the Bail Act 1976 (&sect;4 and Schedule 1, as amended), but -- generally -- everyone has a "right" to bail.
This is then excepted where (for indictable or either-way offences, adults, and not considering certain special cases):[^see-cps-bail-a1]
- There are substantial grounds to believe the accused would:
  - Fail to surrender,
  - Commit an offence,
  - Obstruct justice
- The accused was already on bail,
- The accused has previously failed to surrender or breached bail conditions,
- It is necessary for the protection of the accused,
- The accused is a prisoner, and/or
- More time is needed to gather information to determine as to bail.

However, bail should still be granted if these concerns can be addressed through bail conditions (electronic monitoring, "live and reside", etc.).
The accused's character, community ties, and previous record, among other things should also be taken into consideration.

## How should those remanded be treated?
The following is based on PSO 4600[^pso-4600] and the Prison Rules 1999 (S.I. 1999/728), as amended.
I won't cite specifics for brevity.

### Housing
Those on remand cannot be made to share a cell with a convicted prisoner, and should -- where possible -- be kept out of contact (unless the remanded person consents to it).

### Exercise &c.
Those on remand must, though considering weather and other conditions, be given at least one hour of time in the open air.

### Time Limits
The Custody Time Limit (CTL) begins when the accused appears in court to be remanded, following charge.[^cps-ctl]

For summary only offences, the CTL is 56 days.
For either-way offences in the magistrate's court, the CPS also considers the CTL to be 56 days, though it can be up to 70 days; this extends to 182 days where the case is sent to the crown court.
Finally, for indictable only offences, the CTL is 182 days.
When this CTL expires, sans extension, the accused must be granted bail.

To extend a CTL, the court must be satisfied that, on the balance of probabilities:[^s223-poa]
1. The extension is needed because of:
   1. Illness or absence of a key person,
   2. Postponement due to separation of trials of defendants/charges, or
   3. Another "good and sufficient cause", and
2. The prosecution has acted "with all due diligence and expedition".

The decision to allow/refuse an extension can be appealed.

### Special Rights
As well as the above, prisoners on remand must also, as far as possible:
- Have access to:
  - Books, newspapers, writing materials, etc.,
  - Hobby and recreational materials provided by friends/family/themselves,
  - Their own clothing, as long as it is suitable and appropriate, and
  - A greater quantity of smoking materials;
- Be able to:
  - Have as many visitors as they wish,
  - Carry out business,
  - Send and receive as many letters as they wish,
  - Be attended by their own medical professional, and
  - Choose not to work.

## International Opinion
The UK does (generally and nominally) follow international opinion on treatment of those remanded awaiting trial, but it is important to set them out here.
Also worth a read is "Human Rights and Arrest, Pre-Trial Detention and Administrative Detention".[^hra-ptd-ad]

### UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (1957 & 1977)[^un-smr-1]
It is made clear in this document that:
> Untried prisoners shall be kept separate from convicted prisoners

Further:
> Untried prisoners shall sleep singly in separate rooms

The UK policy on clothing, access to materials, access to private healthcare, visits, and communications all follow the rules set out in this document.

### UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Mandela Rules)[^un-smr-2]
The Mandela Rules are an updated version of the above, but with no substantial changes in respect of "untried" prisoners.

### European Prison Rules[^coe-prison-rules]
As is a common theme, this recommendation makes clear that:
> In deciding to accommodate prisoners in particular prisons or in particular sections of a prison due account shall be taken of the need to detain [...] untried prisoners separately from sentenced prisoners

And:
> As far as possible untried prisoners shall be given the option of accommodation in single cells

Again, the UK policy generally follows all rules within this recommendation.

### European Remand Rules[^coe-remand]
As is reflected in the UK's "right to bail":
> the remand in custody of persons suspected of an offence shall be the exception rather than the norm [and] remand in custody shall only be used when strictly necessary and as a measure of last resort; it shall not be used for punitive reasons.

The UK's conditions for determining whether a person is remanded also echo the conditions set out in this recommendation.

While they set out no specific maximum period, it is made clear that "priority shall be given to cases involving a person who has been remanded in custody" and, in any case, remand should be reviewed at least monthly.

It is also made clear, in relation to punishments, that:
> No disciplinary punishment imposed on a remand prisoner shall have the effect of extending the length of the remand in custody or interfering with the preparation of his or her defence. [...]
> The punishment of solitary confinement shall not affect the access to a lawyer and shall allow minimum contact with family outside. 
> It should not affect the conditions of a remand prisoner’s detention in respect of bedding, physical exercise, hygiene, access to reading material and approved religious representatives.

All other UK policy appears to align with this recommendation.

## Notes
[^see-cps-bail-a1]: 
    See also:
    - Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) (n.d.), "Magistrates Court - Simple Bail Structure - Card 1 - Adult Defendant: Indictable Only or Either–Way Imprisonable Offence", Annex 1 in CPS (21 Nov. 2023), "[Bail](https://www.cps.gov.uk/prosecution-guidance/bail)".
    - Gov.uk (n.d.), "[Being charged with a crime: Remand](https://www.gov.uk/charged-crime/remand)".

[^pso-4600]: HM Prison Service (1 Jan. 2020), "[Unconvicted, Unsentenced and Civil Prisoners](https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5f745260e90e0740cf4eb0d1/pso-4600-unconvicted-unsentenced-civil-prisoners.pdf)", Prison Service Order 4600.

[^cps-ctl]: CPS (22 Apr. 2020), "[Custody Time Limits](https://www.cps.gov.uk/prosecution-guidance/custody-time-limits)"; see also CPS (n.d.), "[CTL Calculator](https://cps.outsystemsenterprise.com/CTLCalculator/)".

[^s223-poa]: Prosecution of Offences Act 1985, &sect;22(3), as amended.

[^un-smr-1]: "Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners", adopted by the First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Geneva in 1955, and approved by the Economic and Social Council by its resolutions 663 C (XXIV) of 31 July 1957 and 2076 (LXII) of 13 May 1977.

[^un-smr-2]: "United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Mandela Rules)", adopted by the General Assembly on 17 December 2015, A/RES/70/175.

[^coe-prison-rules]: "Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers to member States on the European Prison Rules", adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 11 January 2006, at the 952nd meeting of the Ministers' Deputies and revised and amended by the Committee of Ministers on 1 July 2020 at the 1380th meeting of the Ministers' Deputies, Rec(2006)2-rev.

[^coe-remand]: "Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers to member states on the use of remand in custody, the conditions in which it takes place and the provision of safeguards against abuse", adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 27 September 2006 at the 974th meeting of the Ministers' Deputies, Rec(2006)13.

[^hra-ptd-ad]: Chap. 5 in Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (2003), "Human Rights in the Administration of Justice: A Manual on Human Rights for Judges, Prosecutors and Lawyers", ed. International Bar Association, [ST/]HR/P/PT/9.
